OAuth documentation overhaul (#2300)
clerkinc/clerk-docs: docs/oauth/oauth-single-sign-on.mdx

- **User Info URL**: Used by the client to retrieve additional user data upon authentication.

## Get additional user information with the OAuth 2.0 flow

After a user has successfully completed an OAuth 2.0 flow, you can retrieve additional user information from Clerk's [`/oauth/userinfo`](/docs/reference/frontend-api/tag/OAuth2-Identify-Provider#operation/getOAuthUserInfo){{ target: '_blank' }} endpoint. When making the request to this endpoint, you must include the Clerk access token in the `Authorization` header.

The `/oauth/userinfo` endpoint provides the following user properties, depending on the granted scopes:

| Property | Description |
| - | - |
| `user_id` | The ID of the user |
| `sub` | The ID of the user |
| `given_name` | The user's first name |
| `family_name` | The user's last name |
| `name` | The user's full name |
| `picture` | The user's avatar URL |
| `preferred_username` | The user's username |
| `email` | The user's primary email address |
| `email_verified` | Whether the user's primary email address is verified |
| `public_metadata` | The user's public metadata |
| `private_metadata` | The user's private metadata |

> | `unsafe_metadata` | The user's unsafe metadata |

Author: Did this! But need a sense check

### Get token information

For validating access tokens or refresh tokens and retrieving additional token metadata, Clerk provides a standard OAuth 2.0 [Token Introspection Endpoint](https://www.oauth.com/oauth2-servers/token-introspection-endpoint/) at [`/oauth/token_info`](/docs/reference/frontend-api/tag/OAuth2-Identify-Provider#operation/getOAuthTokenInfo){{ target: '_blank' }}.

The endpoint returns detailed token information such as if the token is still active, the client ID, and the granted scopes.

> [!WARNING]
> This endpoint is protected. You must provide your Clerk Client ID and Client Secret credentials to authenticate.

### Grant types

Clerk's OAuth 2.0 IdP implementation supports the following authorization flows and grant types:

- [Authorization Code](https://oauth.net/2/grant-types/authorization-code/)
- [PKCE](https://oauth.net/2/pkce/)

> - [Refresh token](https://oauth.net/2/grant-types/refresh-token/)

Author: @jescalan Feels like this is redundant and already part of the How Clerk implements OAuth page - or do you think we keep it here?

Reviewer: nah lets cut it

### Get additional user information with the OAuth 2.0 flow using the OpenID Connect (OIDC) protocol

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Not all third-party apps expect or use OIDC. However, this feature was designed with OIDC compatibility in mind, which is why it's included in this guide. Make sure your integration target supports OIDC before proceeding

> In order to enable OIDC in your OAuth flow, you can follow the same steps outlined above, but ensure to select the `openid` scope when configuring your OAuth application in the Clerk Dashboard. This scope triggers OIDC and instructs the authorization server to issue an ID token alongside your access token.

Author: Added this! But need a sense check

![OAuth scopes openid](/docs/images/oauth/oauth-scopes.png)

Once a user successfully authenticates using the OIDC flow, you'll receive:

- An **access token**
- A **refresh token**
- An **ID token**

The ID token is a JWT (JSON Web Token) that contains standard JWT claims as defined in RFC 7519, as well as additional custom claims that represent the authenticated user's profile information. The token is signed using your instance's private key.

> You must validate the ID token before using any of the user information it contains. Validation requires verifying the token signature using your instance's public key. You can find your instance's public key at `https://clerk.<INSERT_YOUR_APP_DOMAIN>.com/.well-known/jwks.json`.

Author: This still needs to be done

| `exp` | The expiration time of the token |
| `iat` | The time at which the token was issued |
| `jti` | A unique identifier for the token |

Depending on the granted scopes, the ID token can include the following additional claims:

| Additional claim | Description |
| - | - |
| `nonce` | The nonce provided and used during the request |
| `family_name` | The user's last name |
| `given_name` | The user's first name |
| `name` | The user's full name |
| `picture` | The user's avatar URL |
| `preferred_username` | The user's username |
| `email` | The user's primary email address |
| `email_verified` | Whether the user's primary email address is verified |
| `public_metadata` | The user's public metadata |
| `private_metadata` | The user's private metadata |
| `unsafe_metadata` | The user's unsafe metadata |

### OIDC prompt

As part of an OIDC request, you can indicate the desired sign-in experience for the user by using the `prompt` parameter. The following values are supported:

- `none`: The user doesn't interact with the provider, thus they need to have an active session already. If not, the provider responds with an error.

> - `login`: The user is forced to re-authenticate, even if they already have an active session. If there was already an active session, the provider ends it.

Reviewer 2: > `prompt=none`

Yes this correct, this means the user is guaranteed to not have to interact with the provider. _However_, this means that the consent screen **must be disabled**. Currently with the consent screen enabled _all requests to `/oauth/authorize`_ trigger the consent screen, so `prompt=none` will **always** fail here. This may change once we have more advanced scopes, but for now that's how it works.

> `prompt=login`

Yes this is correct. However technically there is a bug to bypass this. I will write a ticket to fix this, but imo the docs can stay the same.

There are also `prompt=consent` and `prompt=select_account`, but we don't support these right now but these should be easy to support, writing tickets for these.

## Configure Clerk as an IdP

Clerk is the OAuth 2.0 and OIDC IdP for your application. The "client" is the third party site or tool that you want your users to authenticate to.

Here is the general flow to set up your Clerk instance as an OAuth provider:

1. Create a connection or integration in the client.
1. Create an OAuth application in Clerk and configure it.
1. Obtain the Client ID and Client Secret from Clerk.
1. Enter these credentials into the client to complete the integration.

### Create a connection or integration in the client

Ensure you have setup a new connection within the third-party client or tool where your users will authenticate. As part of this process, you'll be provided a **redirect URL** that you’ll need to use in the next step.

### Create a Clerk OAuth application

To create an OAuth application:

1. In the Clerk Dashboard, navigate to the [**OAuth Applications**](https://dashboard.clerk.com/last-active?path=user-authentication/oauth-applications) page.
1. Select the **Add OAuth application** button. A modal will open.
1. Complete the following fields:
   - `Name` - Helps you identify your application.

>    - `Scopes` - The scopes that you would like to leverage. To find out more about the scopes currently supported by Clerk, check out the [OAuth implementation reference documentation](/docs/oauth/how-clerk-implements-oauth#scopes).

Reviewer 2: Same issue as this: https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/2300/files#r2143775466

Author: This is all addressed in the How Clerk implements OAuth page @Ben2W

```

Once a user successfully authenticates using the OIDC flow, you'll receive:

- An **access token**
- A **refresh token**
- An **ID token**

The ID token is a JWT (JSON Web Token) that contains standard JWT claims as defined in RFC 7519, as well as additional custom claims that represent the authenticated user's profile information. The token is signed using your instance's private key.

You must verify the signature on the ID token before using any of the user information it contains. This will require your instance's public key. You can find your instance's public key at `https://clerk.<INSERT_YOUR_APP_DOMAIN>.com/.well-known/jwks.json`.

You can verify the ID token using the `jsonwebtoken` library as an example, like this:

```js
const jwt = require('jsonwebtoken')

function verifyIdToken(idToken) {
  jwt.verify(
    idToken,
    PUBLIC_KEY,
    {
      algorithms: ['RS256'],
      issuer: 'https://clerk.<YOUR_APP_DOMAIN>.com',
      audience: '<YOUR_CLIENT_ID>',
    },
    (err, decoded) => {
      if (err) {
        console.error('Token verification failed:', err)
      } else {
        console.log('Token is valid:', decoded)
      }
    },
  )
}

> ```

Author: Sense check @jescalan @wobsoriano

The endpoint returns detailed token information such as if the token is still active, the client ID, and the granted scopes.

> [!WARNING]
> This endpoint is protected. You must provide your Clerk Client ID and Client Secret credentials to authenticate.

Here’s a Next.js API route example illustrating how to call this endpoint assuming you already have your tokens.

```tsx {{ filename: 'app/api/tokeninfo/route.ts' }}
import type { NextApiRequest, NextApiResponse } from 'next'
import qs from 'qs'

// Assume you already have the access token and refresh token available here
const tokens = {
  accessToken: 'YOUR_ACCESS_TOKEN_HERE',
  refreshToken: 'YOUR_REFRESH_TOKEN_HERE',
}

export default async function handler(req: NextApiRequest, res: NextApiResponse) {
  try {
    const response = await fetch(`${process.env.FAPI_URL}/oauth/token_info`, {
      method: 'POST',
      headers: {
        // Include the access token in the Authorization header
        Authorization: `Bearer ${tokens.accessToken}`,
        'Content-Type': 'application/x-www-form-urlencoded',
      },

>       body: qs.stringify({
>         // Include the refresh token in the body
>         token: tokens.refreshToken,
>       }),

Reviewer 3: As jeff said, let's use built-in API

```suggestion
      body: new URLSearchParams({
        // Include the refresh token in the body
        token: tokens.refreshToken,
      }),
```

- **Token URL**: Used by the client to exchange an authorization code for an access token and a refresh token.
- **User Info URL**: Used by the client to retrieve additional user data upon authentication.

## Get additional user information with the OAuth 2.0 flow

After a user has successfully completed an OAuth 2.0 flow, you can retrieve additional user information from Clerk's [`/oauth/userinfo`](/docs/reference/frontend-api/tag/OAuth2-Identify-Provider#operation/getOAuthUserInfo){{ target: '_blank' }} endpoint. When making the request to this endpoint, you must include the OAuth access token in the `Authorization` header.

This example is written for Next.js App Router but can be adapted for any framework/language. It assumes the OAuth flow has already been completed and that you have obtained an access token from Clerk.

```tsx {{ filename: 'app/api/userinfo/route.ts' }}
import type { NextRequest } from 'next/server'
import { NextResponse } from 'next/server'

export async function GET() {
  // Assume you already have the access token available here
  const accessToken = 'YOUR_ACCESS_TOKEN_HERE'

  try {

>     const response = await fetch(`${process.env.FAPI_URL}/oauth/userinfo`, {

Reviewer: I think we can use the backend sdk for this actually! https://github.com/clerk/javascript/blob/main/packages/backend/src/api/factory.ts#L76

Author: @jescalan ?

| `preferred_username` | The user's username |
| `email` | The user's primary email address |
| `email_verified` | Whether the user's primary email address is verified |
| `public_metadata` | The user's public metadata |
| `private_metadata` | The user's private metadata |
| `unsafe_metadata` | The user's unsafe metadata |

### Get token information

For validating access tokens or refresh tokens and retrieving additional token metadata, Clerk provides a standard OAuth 2.0 [Token Introspection Endpoint](https://www.oauth.com/oauth2-servers/token-introspection-endpoint/) at [`/oauth/token_info`](/docs/reference/frontend-api/tag/OAuth2-Identify-Provider#operation/getOAuthTokenInfo){{ target: '_blank' }}.

The endpoint returns detailed token information such as if the token is still active, the client ID, and the granted scopes.

> [!WARNING]
> This endpoint is protected. You must provide your Clerk Client ID and Client Secret credentials to authenticate.

Here’s a Next.js API route example illustrating how to call this endpoint assuming you already have your tokens.

```tsx {{ filename: 'app/api/tokeninfo/route.ts' }}
import type { NextApiRequest, NextApiResponse } from 'next'

> import qs from 'qs'

Reviewer: I think we cut `qs` here and rely on existing primitives. you can do `new UrlSearchParams().toString()` or something like this

// Assume you already have the access token and refresh token available here
const tokens = {
  accessToken: 'YOUR_ACCESS_TOKEN_HERE',
  refreshToken: 'YOUR_REFRESH_TOKEN_HERE',
}

export default async function handler(req: NextApiRequest, res: NextApiResponse) {
  try {

>     const response = await fetch(`${process.env.FAPI_URL}/oauth/token_info`, {

Reviewer: Same here with backend sdk 🙌

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/clerk/clerk-docs/pull/2300#discussion_r2143670710

Author: @jescalan :think_spin:

Reviewer: ignore!

- [PKCE](https://oauth.net/2/pkce/)
- [Refresh token](https://oauth.net/2/grant-types/refresh-token/)

## Get additional user information with the OAuth 2.0 flow using the OpenID Connect (OIDC) protocol

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Not all third-party apps expect or use OIDC. However, this feature was designed with OIDC compatibility in mind, which is why it's included in this guide. Make sure your integration target supports OIDC before proceeding

In order to enable OIDC in your OAuth flow, you can follow the same steps outlined above, but ensure to select the `openid` scope when configuring your OAuth application in the Clerk Dashboard. This scope triggers OIDC and instructs the authorization server to issue an ID token alongside your access token.

![OAuth scopes openid](/docs/images/oauth/oauth-scopes.png)

You will also need to include this `openid` scope in the query parameters of your authorization endpoint when initiating the OAuth flow. For example:

```bash
https://clerk.<INSERT_YOUR_APP_DOMAIN>.com/oauth/authorize?client_id=x&response_type=code&scopes=email&state=y&code_challenge=z&redirect_uri=a&scope=openid%20profile%20email&

> ```

Author: Need a sense check on this @jescalan

      }
    },
  )
}
```

The ID token includes the following standard claims:

| Standard claim | Description |
| - | - |
| `iss` | The issuer of the token, which matches your Clerk Frontend API URL |
| `sub` | The subject of the token, which matches the authenticated user ID |
| `aud` | The intended audience of the token, which matches the used Client ID |
| `exp` | The expiration time of the token |
| `iat` | The time at which the token was issued |
| `jti` | A unique identifier for the token |

Depending on the granted scopes, the ID token can include the following additional claims:

| Additional claim | Description |
| - | - |
| `nonce` | The nonce provided and used during the request |
| `family_name` | The user's last name |
| `given_name` | The user's first name |
| `name` | The user's full name |
| `picture` | The user's avatar URL |
| `preferred_username` | The user's username |
| `email` | The user's primary email address |
| `email_verified` | Whether the user's primary email address is verified |
| `public_metadata` | The user's public metadata |
| `private_metadata` | The user's private metadata |
| `unsafe_metadata` | The user's unsafe metadata |

> ### OIDC prompt

Reviewer: I don't think this is properly implemented at the moment and has some weird interactions with dynamic client registration and dashboard toggles. I would like to add this back in the future when we look into it, but for now probably should cut

### Configure your client

Once you have set up a Clerk OAuth app, you'll need to configure a few settings in your client to establish the connection. All the necessary information can be found in your Clerk OAuth app's settings, starting with two key parameters:

- **Client ID**: Public identifier of your Clerk OAuth app.
- **Client Secret**: Confidential secret used to authenticate your Clerk OAuth app.

Both of these will need to be entered into your client's setup interface to complete the integration. Once completed, your users will be able to authenticate into your app using their Clerk credentials.

Other available settings that may be useful include:

- **Discovery URL**: Used by the client to retrieve the configuration data of the Clerk OAuth app.
- **Authorize URL**: Used by the client to request authorization from your user.
- **Token URL**: Used by the client to exchange an authorization code for an access token and a refresh token.
- **User Info URL**: Used by the client to retrieve additional user data upon authentication.

## Get additional user information with the OAuth 2.0 flow

> After a user has successfully completed an OAuth 2.0 flow, you can retrieve additional user information from Clerk's [`/oauth/userinfo`](/docs/reference/frontend-api/tag/OAuth2-Identify-Provider#operation/getOAuthUserInfo){{ target: '_blank' }} endpoint. When making the request to this endpoint, you must include the OAuth access token in the `Authorization` header.

Reviewer: This URL doesn't exist - looks like maybe a hallucintation artifact

```suggestion
After a user has successfully completed an OAuth 2.0 flow, you can retrieve additional user information from Clerk's [`/oauth/userinfo`](https://clerk.com/docs/reference/frontend-api/tag/OAuth2-Identify-Provider#operation/getOAuthUserInfoPOST){{ target: '_blank' }} endpoint. When making the request to this endpoint, you must include the OAuth access token in the `Authorization` header.
```

      { status: 500 },
    )
  }
}
```

**Example response**

```json
{
  "object": "string",
  "instance_id": "string",
  "user_id": "string",
  "sub": "string",
  "email": "string",
  "email_verified": true,
  "family_name": "string",
  "given_name": "string",
  "name": "string",
  "username": "string",
  "preferred_username": "string",
  "picture": "string",
  "public_metadata": {},
  "private_metadata": {},
  "unsafe_metadata": {}
}
```

The `/oauth/userinfo` endpoint provides the following user properties, depending on the granted scopes:

| Property | Description |
| - | - |
| `user_id` | The ID of the user |
| `sub` | The ID of the user |
| `given_name` | The user's first name |
| `family_name` | The user's last name |
| `name` | The user's full name |
| `picture` | The user's avatar URL |
| `preferred_username` | The user's username |
| `email` | The user's primary email address |
| `email_verified` | Whether the user's primary email address is verified |
| `public_metadata` | The user's public metadata |
| `private_metadata` | The user's private metadata |
| `unsafe_metadata` | The user's unsafe metadata |

### Get token information

> For validating access tokens or refresh tokens and retrieving additional token metadata, Clerk provides a standard OAuth 2.0 [Token Introspection Endpoint](https://www.oauth.com/oauth2-servers/token-introspection-endpoint/) at [`/oauth/token_info`](/docs/reference/frontend-api/tag/OAuth2-Identify-Provider#operation/getOAuthTokenInfo){{ target: '_blank' }}.

Reviewer: Second link didn't exist, first link was to an okta-owned site, prefer the spec itself

```suggestion
For validating access tokens or refresh tokens and retrieving additional token metadata, Clerk provides a standard OAuth 2.0 [Token Introspection Endpoint](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7662) at [`/oauth/token_info`](https://clerk.com/docs/reference/frontend-api/tag/OAuth2-Identify-Provider#operation/getOAuthTokenInfo){{ target: '_blank' }}.
```
